.specify/memory/constitution.md, before:

<!--
Sync Impact Report:
- Version change: 1.4.0 → 1.5.0
- Modified principles:
  - V. E2E Testing Discipline → I. E2E Testing Discipline (moved to first position)
  - I. API-First Contract + II. Type-Safe Client → II. API-First Contract & Type-Safe Client (merged)
  - III. Component-Driven UI → III. Component-Driven UI (renumbered)
  - IV. Query-Centric Data → IV. Query-Centric Data (renumbered)
  - VII. Simplicity → V. Simplicity (renumbered)
- Added sections: None
- Removed sections: None (Type-Safe Client merged into API-First Contract)
- Templates requiring updates: ✅ plan-template.md, ✅ spec-template.md, ✅ tasks-template.md (no changes needed)
- Follow-up TODOs: None
-->

# Frontend Console Constitution

## Core Principles

### I. E2E Testing Discipline (NON-NEGOTIABLE)

All testing MUST be done exclusively with Playwright end-to-end tests against the real backend API.

**Testing Approach**
- Every feature MUST have corresponding E2E tests before it is considered complete
- Tests MUST simulate real user behavior through the browser
- Tests MUST cover the full user journey, not isolated components
- No unit tests, no integration tests in isolation

**Coverage Requirements**
- All routes (public, authenticated, error) MUST have E2E test coverage
- All user interactions (buttons, forms, modals, navigation, CRUD) MUST be tested
- All loading states and error states MUST be verified
- Route parameters and query strings MUST be tested for edge cases

**Real Backend Only**
- Tests MUST run against the real backend API - mocking is strictly prohibited
- Tests MUST NOT use `page.route()` or any request interception to fake responses
- If the backend is not running, tests MUST fail clearly

**Test Independence**
- Tests MUST NOT depend on execution order of other tests
- Tests MUST clean up any data they create (or use isolated test data)
- Tests MUST be able to run in parallel without conflicts

**AI-Driven Execution**
- Tests MUST run non-interactively without waiting for human review
- The test-fix cycle MUST be autonomous: run tests → read errors → fix code → re-run
- Playwright MUST use only the `'list'` reporter for clean, parseable AI output

**Error Debugging Protocol**
- On test failure, capture HTTP request as curl command: `tests/debug/{test-name}-{timestamp}-request.sh`
- On test failure, capture HTTP response: `tests/debug/{test-name}-{timestamp}-response.txt`
- Debug files MUST be gitignored but directory structure MUST exist

**Console Error Capture (NON-NEGOTIABLE)**
- All browser console errors MUST be captured and output during test execution
- React/JavaScript errors (e.g., context errors, runtime exceptions) MUST be visible in test output
- Tests MUST listen to `page.on('console')` and `page.on('pageerror')` events
- Console errors MUST be printed immediately when they occur, not just on test failure
- This ensures application bugs (like missing context providers) are immediately visible
- **All console errors MUST cause the test to fail** - a successful test MUST have zero console errors
- Tests MUST collect console errors and assert that the error list is empty at test completion
- **No exceptions**: warnings may be logged but ALL errors (including network errors like 404/500) are test failures
- **No filtering of error types**: HTTP errors (4xx/5xx) indicate test design problems that must be fixed, not filtered
- When tests fail due to console errors, AI agents MUST apply Root Cause Tracing to fix the underlying issue

**Configuration**
- Playwright MUST only include the `chromium` project (no Firefox/WebKit)
- Test files MUST be in `tests/e2e/` with naming `{route-or-feature}.spec.ts`
- Page objects MUST be used for reusable page interactions
- Test utilities MUST be in `tests/e2e/utils/`

**Quality Gates**
- All E2E tests MUST pass before merge
- New routes/interactions MUST have corresponding E2E tests
- No flaky tests allowed - tests MUST be deterministic

**Test Description Alignment (NON-NEGOTIABLE)**
- Test expectations MUST directly verify what the test description claims to test
- If a test is named "should display activities", it MUST assert that activities are visible, not just a header
- Test descriptions are contracts - the assertions MUST fulfill that contract
- Avoid proxy assertions: testing a header exists does NOT prove the feature works
- Each test MUST have at least one assertion that directly validates the described behavior
- Example violation: `test('should display activities')` with only `expect(header).toBeVisible()` - this tests the header, not activities
- Example correct: `test('should display activities')` with `expect(activityItems.count()).toBeGreaterThan(0)`

### II. Root Cause Tracing (Debugging Discipline)

When problems occur during development, root cause analysis MUST be performed before implementing fixes:
- Problems MUST be traced backward through the call chain to find the original trigger
- Symptoms MUST be distinguished from root causes
- Fixes MUST address the source of the problem, NOT work around symptoms
- Test cases MUST NOT be removed or weakened to make tests pass
- Debuggers and logging MUST be used to understand control flow
- Multiple potential causes MUST be systematically eliminated
- Documentation MUST be updated to prevent similar issues
- Root cause MUST be verified through testing before closing the issue

**Rationale**: Superficial fixes create technical debt and hide underlying architectural problems. Root cause analysis ensures problems are solved at their source, preventing recurrence and maintaining system integrity. This discipline transforms debugging from firefighting into systematic problem-solving that improves overall code quality.

**Debugging Process**:
1. **Reproduce**: Create reliable reproduction case
2. **Observe**: Gather evidence through logs, debugger, tests
3. **Hypothesize**: Form theories about root cause
4. **Test**: Design experiments to validate/invalidate hypotheses
5. **Fix**: Implement fix addressing root cause
6. **Verify**: Ensure fix works and doesn't break existing functionality
7. **Document**: Update docs/tests to prevent regression

**AI Implementation Requirement**:
- AI agents MUST perform root cause analysis before implementing fixes
- AI agents MUST NOT implement superficial workarounds
- AI agents MUST document the root cause analysis process
- AI agents MUST update tests to prevent regression of root causes


### III. API-First Contract & Type-Safe Client

The backend API is the product. The frontend MUST treat the API as the single source of truth, with full type safety from contract to component.

**API Contract Rules**
- Frontend MUST NOT implement business logic that belongs in the backend
- All data mutations MUST go through API endpoints
- Frontend MUST handle API errors gracefully with user-friendly messages
- API contract changes MUST be coordinated between frontend and backend teams
- Use `Content-Type: application/json` for all API communication (protojson encoding)
- All endpoints versioned under `/api/v1/`

**Type Safety Requirements**
- Generate TypeScript types from backend protobuf using `protoc-gen-ts` (ts-proto)
- Types MUST be generated BEFORE any implementation begins
- Generated types live in `src/api/generated/` directory
- NEVER use `any` type for API responses or requests
- NEVER write manual type definitions that duplicate protobuf contracts
- API client functions MUST return typed responses using generated types
- Use discriminated unions for API response states (loading, error, success)
- Type generation MUST be automated via `pnpm run generate:types` script

**Type Generation Command:**
```bash
# Generate types from backend proto files
protoc --plugin=./node_modules/.bin/protoc-gen-ts_proto \
  --ts_proto_out=./src/api/generated \
  --ts_proto_opt=outputServices=false \
  --ts_proto_opt=esModuleInterop=true \
  --ts_proto_opt=snakeToCamel=true \
  -I ./backend/api/proto \
  ./backend/api/proto/[PROJECT]/v1/*.proto
```

### IV. Component-Driven UI

Build UI as a composition of reusable, isolated components.

- MUST use shadcn/ui as the component library foundation
- Components MUST be stateless where possible; lift state up
- Styling MUST use utility-first CSS (e.g., Tailwind CSS)
- Each component MUST have a single responsibility
- Prefer composition over prop drilling; use context sparingly

### V. Query-Centric Data

Use a query library (e.g., TanStack Query) as the data layer.

- All API calls MUST go through query hooks (`useQuery`, `useMutation`)
- Cache invalidation MUST be explicit and intentional
- Optimistic updates SHOULD be used for better UX where safe
- Query keys MUST be consistent and predictable
- Avoid global state; prefer server state via query cache
- Minimal client state; use React state for UI-only concerns

### VI. Simplicity

Start simple. Add complexity only when proven necessary.

- YAGNI: Do not build features "just in case"
- Prefer fewer dependencies over many
- Avoid premature abstraction; wait for patterns to emerge
- Configuration over code where possible
- Delete code that is not used

## Technology Stack

**Core Framework:**
- TypeScript (strict mode enabled)
- React with functional components and hooks
- Vite for build tooling

**Data Layer:**
- TanStack Query (React Query) for server state
- Minimal global state (React Context or Zustand if needed)

**UI Layer:**
- Tailwind CSS for styling
- shadcn/ui components
- Lucide for icons

**Type Generation:**
- protoc-gen-ts for protobuf contracts

**Testing:**
- Vitest + Testing Library for component tests
- Playwright for E2E tests
- NO unit tests; NO API integration tests (backend tests its own contracts)
- Component tests: fast, mock hooks, test every component
- E2E tests: real backend, test all user journeys

**Routing:**
- React Router
- Route structure mirrors resource hierarchy:
  - `/projects/:id/users`
  - `/projects/:id/segments`
  - `/projects/:id/campaigns`
  - etc.

## Development Workflow

### Implementation Order (MANDATORY)

For each user story, tasks MUST be executed in this exact order:

1. **Generate Types**: Run `pnpm run generate:types` from backend proto
2. **Write Component Tests**: Create failing tests in `tests/components/`
3. **Write E2E Tests**: Create failing tests in `tests/e2e/`
4. **Verify Tests Fail**: Run `pnpm test` and `pnpm test:e2e` - all new tests MUST fail
5. **Implement Hooks**: Create query/mutation hooks using generated types
6. **Implement Components**: Build UI components consuming hooks
7. **Verify Tests Pass**: Run full test suite - all tests MUST pass
8. **Refactor**: Clean up code while keeping tests green

**⚠️ VIOLATION**: Implementing code before tests exist is a constitution violation.

### API Integration Flow

1. **Contract First**: Obtain API contract (protobuf)
2. **Generate Types**: Run `pnpm run generate:types`
3. **Write Tests**: Component tests + E2E tests that FAIL
4. **Create Hook**: Implement query/mutation hook with generated types
5. **Build Component**: Consume hook in UI component
6. **Verify**: Run full test suite - all tests MUST pass

### Code Organization

```
src/
├── api/           # Generated types and API client
├── hooks/         # Query hooks (useUsers, useProjects, etc.)
├── components/    # Reusable UI components
├── pages/         # Route-level components
├── lib/           # Utilities and helpers
└── tests/
    └── e2e/           # End-to-end user journey tests (Playwright)

```

### Quality Gates

- All tests MUST pass before merge
- Type checking MUST pass (`tsc --noEmit`)
- Linting MUST pass (ESLint)
- Format MUST be consistent (Prettier)
- No `any` types without explicit justification
- Component tests required for every new component

## Backend API Reference

### API Conventions

- **Base Path**: `/api/v1/`
- **Content-Type**: `application/json` (protojson encoding)
- **Project Scope**: Include `project_id` header for all project-scoped calls
- **Health Check**: `GET /health` returns `{"status":"ok"}`





## Governance

This constitution supersedes all other development practices for frontend projects.

**Amendment Process:**
1. Propose change with rationale
2. Review impact on existing code
3. Update constitution with version bump
4. Communicate changes to team

**Compliance:**
- All PRs MUST verify compliance with these principles
- Complexity MUST be justified in PR description
- Violations require explicit exception with documented reasoning

**Version Policy:**
- MAJOR: Principle removal or fundamental change
- MINOR: New principle or significant guidance addition
- PATCH: Clarifications and minor refinements

**Version**: 1.5.0 | **Ratified**: 2025-12-09 | **Last Amended**: 2025-12-11

Commit message:

Add API Request/Response Transparency

.specify/memory/constitution.md, after:

<!--
Sync Impact Report:
- Version change: 1.4.0 → 1.5.0
- Modified principles:
  - V. E2E Testing Discipline → I. E2E Testing Discipline (moved to first position)
  - I. API-First Contract + II. Type-Safe Client → II. API-First Contract & Type-Safe Client (merged)
  - III. Component-Driven UI → III. Component-Driven UI (renumbered)
  - IV. Query-Centric Data → IV. Query-Centric Data (renumbered)
  - VII. Simplicity → V. Simplicity (renumbered)
- Added sections: None
- Removed sections: None (Type-Safe Client merged into API-First Contract)
- Templates requiring updates: ✅ plan-template.md, ✅ spec-template.md, ✅ tasks-template.md (no changes needed)
- Follow-up TODOs: None
-->

# Frontend Console Constitution

## Core Principles

### I. E2E Testing Discipline (NON-NEGOTIABLE)

All testing MUST be done exclusively with Playwright end-to-end tests against the real backend API.

**Testing Approach**
- Every feature MUST have corresponding E2E tests before it is considered complete
- Tests MUST simulate real user behavior through the browser
- Tests MUST cover the full user journey, not isolated components
- No unit tests, no integration tests in isolation

**Coverage Requirements**
- All routes (public, authenticated, error) MUST have E2E test coverage
- All user interactions (buttons, forms, modals, navigation, CRUD) MUST be tested
- All loading states and error states MUST be verified
- Route parameters and query strings MUST be tested for edge cases

**Real Backend Only**
- Tests MUST run against the real backend API - mocking is strictly prohibited
- Tests MUST NOT use `page.route()` or any request interception to fake responses
- If the backend is not running, tests MUST fail clearly

**Test Independence**
- Tests MUST NOT depend on execution order of other tests
- Tests MUST clean up any data they create (or use isolated test data)
- Tests MUST be able to run in parallel without conflicts

**AI-Driven Execution**
- Tests MUST run non-interactively without waiting for human review
- The test-fix cycle MUST be autonomous: run tests → read errors → fix code → re-run
- Playwright MUST use only the `'list'` reporter for clean, parseable AI output

**Error Debugging Protocol**
- On test failure, capture HTTP request as curl command: `tests/debug/{test-name}-{timestamp}-request.sh`
- On test failure, capture HTTP response: `tests/debug/{test-name}-{timestamp}-response.txt`
- Debug files MUST be gitignored but directory structure MUST exist

**Console Error Capture (NON-NEGOTIABLE)**
- All browser console errors MUST be captured and output during test execution
- React/JavaScript errors (e.g., context errors, runtime exceptions) MUST be visible in test output
- Tests MUST listen to `page.on('console')` and `page.on('pageerror')` events
- Console errors MUST be printed immediately when they occur, not just on test failure
- This ensures application bugs (like missing context providers) are immediately visible
- **All console errors MUST cause the test to fail** - a successful test MUST have zero console errors
- Tests MUST collect console errors and assert that the error list is empty at test completion
- **No exceptions**: warnings may be logged but ALL errors (including network errors like 404/500) are test failures
- **No filtering of error types**: HTTP errors (4xx/5xx) indicate test design problems that must be fixed, not filtered
- When tests fail due to console errors, AI agents MUST apply Root Cause Tracing to fix the underlying issue

**Configuration**
- Playwright MUST only include the `chromium` project (no Firefox/WebKit)
- Test files MUST be in `tests/e2e/` with naming `{route-or-feature}.spec.ts`
- Page objects MUST be used for reusable page interactions
- Test utilities MUST be in `tests/e2e/utils/`

**Quality Gates**
- All E2E tests MUST pass before merge
- New routes/interactions MUST have corresponding E2E tests
- No flaky tests allowed - tests MUST be deterministic

**Test Description Alignment (NON-NEGOTIABLE)**
- Test expectations MUST directly verify what the test description claims to test
- If a test is named "should display activities", it MUST assert that activities are visible, not just a header
- Test descriptions are contracts - the assertions MUST fulfill that contract
- Avoid proxy assertions: testing a header exists does NOT prove the feature works
- Each test MUST have at least one assertion that directly validates the described behavior
- Example violation: `test('should display activities')` with only `expect(header).toBeVisible()` - this tests the header, not activities
- Example correct: `test('should display activities')` with `expect(activityItems.count()).toBeGreaterThan(0)`

**API Request/Response Transparency (NON-NEGOTIABLE)**
- All backend API calls MUST be logged with full request and response details during test execution
- Tests MUST listen to `page.on('request')` and `page.on('response')` events for API endpoints
- Request logs MUST include: method, URL, headers, and body (for POST/PUT/PATCH)
- Response logs MUST include: status code, URL, and response body
- Logs MUST be output immediately when requests/responses occur for real-time visibility
- This enables AI agents to quickly understand API interactions when debugging test failures
- API logs MUST be attached to test reports for failed tests
- Only API calls (e.g., `/api/`) should be logged, not static assets

### II. Root Cause Tracing (Debugging Discipline)

When problems occur during development, root cause analysis MUST be performed before implementing fixes:
- Problems MUST be traced backward through the call chain to find the original trigger
- Symptoms MUST be distinguished from root causes
- Fixes MUST address the source of the problem, NOT work around symptoms
- Test cases MUST NOT be removed or weakened to make tests pass
- Debuggers and logging MUST be used to understand control flow
- Multiple potential causes MUST be systematically eliminated
- Documentation MUST be updated to prevent similar issues
- Root cause MUST be verified through testing before closing the issue

**Rationale**: Superficial fixes create technical debt and hide underlying architectural problems. Root cause analysis ensures problems are solved at their source, preventing recurrence and maintaining system integrity. This discipline transforms debugging from firefighting into systematic problem-solving that improves overall code quality.

**Debugging Process**:
1. **Reproduce**: Create reliable reproduction case
2. **Observe**: Gather evidence through logs, debugger, tests
3. **Hypothesize**: Form theories about root cause
4. **Test**: Design experiments to validate/invalidate hypotheses
5. **Fix**: Implement fix addressing root cause
6. **Verify**: Ensure fix works and doesn't break existing functionality
7. **Document**: Update docs/tests to prevent regression

**AI Implementation Requirement**:
- AI agents MUST perform root cause analysis before implementing fixes
- AI agents MUST NOT implement superficial workarounds
- AI agents MUST document the root cause analysis process
- AI agents MUST update tests to prevent regression of root causes


### III. API-First Contract & Type-Safe Client

The backend API is the product. The frontend MUST treat the API as the single source of truth, with full type safety from contract to component.

**API Contract Rules**
- Frontend MUST NOT implement business logic that belongs in the backend
- All data mutations MUST go through API endpoints
- Frontend MUST handle API errors gracefully with user-friendly messages
- API contract changes MUST be coordinated between frontend and backend teams
- Use `Content-Type: application/json` for all API communication (protojson encoding)
- All endpoints versioned under `/api/v1/`

**Type Safety Requirements**
- Generate TypeScript types from backend protobuf using `protoc-gen-ts` (ts-proto)
- Types MUST be generated BEFORE any implementation begins
- Generated types live in `src/api/generated/` directory
- NEVER use `any` type for API responses or requests
- NEVER write manual type definitions that duplicate protobuf contracts
- API client functions MUST return typed responses using generated types
- Use discriminated unions for API response states (loading, error, success)
- Type generation MUST be automated via `pnpm run generate:types` script

**Type Generation Command:**
```bash
# Generate types from backend proto files
protoc --plugin=./node_modules/.bin/protoc-gen-ts_proto \
  --ts_proto_out=./src/api/generated \
  --ts_proto_opt=outputServices=false \
  --ts_proto_opt=esModuleInterop=true \
  --ts_proto_opt=snakeToCamel=true \
  -I ./backend/api/proto \
  ./backend/api/proto/[PROJECT]/v1/*.proto
```

### IV. Component-Driven UI

Build UI as a composition of reusable, isolated components.

- MUST use shadcn/ui as the component library foundation
- Components MUST be stateless where possible; lift state up
- Styling MUST use utility-first CSS (e.g., Tailwind CSS)
- Each component MUST have a single responsibility
- Prefer composition over prop drilling; use context sparingly

### V. Query-Centric Data

Use a query library (e.g., TanStack Query) as the data layer.

- All API calls MUST go through query hooks (`useQuery`, `useMutation`)
- Cache invalidation MUST be explicit and intentional
- Optimistic updates SHOULD be used for better UX where safe
- Query keys MUST be consistent and predictable
- Avoid global state; prefer server state via query cache
- Minimal client state; use React state for UI-only concerns

### VI. Simplicity

Start simple. Add complexity only when proven necessary.

- YAGNI: Do not build features "just in case"
- Prefer fewer dependencies over many
- Avoid premature abstraction; wait for patterns to emerge
- Configuration over code where possible
- Delete code that is not used

## Technology Stack

**Core Framework:**
- TypeScript (strict mode enabled)
- React with functional components and hooks
- Vite for build tooling

**Data Layer:**
- TanStack Query (React Query) for server state
- Minimal global state (React Context or Zustand if needed)

**UI Layer:**
- Tailwind CSS for styling
- shadcn/ui components
- Lucide for icons

**Type Generation:**
- protoc-gen-ts for protobuf contracts

**Testing:**
- Vitest + Testing Library for component tests
- Playwright for E2E tests
- NO unit tests; NO API integration tests (backend tests its own contracts)
- Component tests: fast, mock hooks, test every component
- E2E tests: real backend, test all user journeys

**Routing:**
- React Router
- Route structure mirrors resource hierarchy:
  - `/projects/:id/users`
  - `/projects/:id/segments`
  - `/projects/:id/campaigns`
  - etc.

## Development Workflow

### Implementation Order (MANDATORY)

For each user story, tasks MUST be executed in this exact order:

1. **Generate Types**: Run `pnpm run generate:types` from backend proto
2. **Write Component Tests**: Create failing tests in `tests/components/`
3. **Write E2E Tests**: Create failing tests in `tests/e2e/`
4. **Verify Tests Fail**: Run `pnpm test` and `pnpm test:e2e` - all new tests MUST fail
5. **Implement Hooks**: Create query/mutation hooks using generated types
6. **Implement Components**: Build UI components consuming hooks
7. **Verify Tests Pass**: Run full test suite - all tests MUST pass
8. **Refactor**: Clean up code while keeping tests green

**⚠️ VIOLATION**: Implementing code before tests exist is a constitution violation.

### API Integration Flow

1. **Contract First**: Obtain API contract (protobuf)
2. **Generate Types**: Run `pnpm run generate:types`
3. **Write Tests**: Component tests + E2E tests that FAIL
4. **Create Hook**: Implement query/mutation hook with generated types
5. **Build Component**: Consume hook in UI component
6. **Verify**: Run full test suite - all tests MUST pass

### Code Organization

```
src/
├── api/           # Generated types and API client
├── hooks/         # Query hooks (useUsers, useProjects, etc.)
├── components/    # Reusable UI components
├── pages/         # Route-level components
├── lib/           # Utilities and helpers
└── tests/
    └── e2e/           # End-to-end user journey tests (Playwright)

```

### Quality Gates

- All tests MUST pass before merge
- Type checking MUST pass (`tsc --noEmit`)
- Linting MUST pass (ESLint)
- Format MUST be consistent (Prettier)
- No `any` types without explicit justification
- Component tests required for every new component

## Backend API Reference

### API Conventions

- **Base Path**: `/api/v1/`
- **Content-Type**: `application/json` (protojson encoding)
- **Project Scope**: Include `project_id` header for all project-scoped calls
- **Health Check**: `GET /health` returns `{"status":"ok"}`





## Governance

This constitution supersedes all other development practices for frontend projects.

**Amendment Process:**
1. Propose change with rationale
2. Review impact on existing code
3. Update constitution with version bump
4. Communicate changes to team

**Compliance:**
- All PRs MUST verify compliance with these principles
- Complexity MUST be justified in PR description
- Violations require explicit exception with documented reasoning

**Version Policy:**
- MAJOR: Principle removal or fundamental change
- MINOR: New principle or significant guidance addition
- PATCH: Clarifications and minor refinements

**Version**: 1.5.0 | **Ratified**: 2025-12-09 | **Last Amended**: 2025-12-11
